OK so we talked about the call stack.
Put that aside for just a moment.
Next we need to address a fundamental characteristic of JavaScript as a language.
JavaScript is a single threaded language.
If you don't know what that means don't worry.
All that it really means is that at any given point in our script whatever script is being executed
javascript is running one thing at a time.
It's it's not multitasking.
It does one thing.
There's a really good blog post.
I think it's on the Google.
One of the official Google Developer blogs talking about asynchronous javascript that humans are multi
threaded.
You know if you can fold the laundry while watching TV or talking to your friend or whatever it is that
humans are single threaded in one very specific case according to this blog post which is when we sneeze
no one can do anything else except sneeze.
So one hears sneezing that's the one thing you're focused on.
So back to JavaScript at any given point.
One thing is being run at a time and this has a whole bunch of implications.
But let me just demonstrate it first.
If we do something extremely simple we consider that log.
I happen first and then a different contact log.
I happen seconds and if we alert in the middle alert high there and I run this code what will we see
in our console when I refresh the page.
Well let's refresh it.
There we go.
I get the alert.
We open up the console.
I won't even let me open it well.
Well let's try it one more time when a refresh we get I happen first and then Hi there.
And it just stops this alert is blocking everything else from going on until the user finishes it or
completes it at which point javascript moves on to the next line.
So that's a simple example.
But here you can tell javascript is doing one thing when it's alerting it's not continuing to console
that log or if we had math after this or a different function call it's not going to move on.
And that seems like it could be a severe limitation if we do things that take time if we do things that
aren't immediate we don't want to just have a user sit there waiting and have no other code running.
But as you've probably seen already we have a way around this and we'll get to that in just a moment.
But here's a simple example of something that we do via javascript all the time we send a request from
the browser we write some javascript code asking for let's say data from a movie API that takes time
it goes sends a request to a server that server may or may not be online.
We may have a valid endpoint we may not but even if everything goes great it still takes time the server
will respond to your request.
If we're looking for movies that match the query bat be 80 it will search through its database find
the relevant information and then send a response back.
Bates Motel and Batman in this case again this takes time.
It can be very slow.
So what happens to our application.
Does it just stop and nothing else happens like what we had over here where this alert potentially takes
a long time for a user to finish.
The user may not notice it.
I mean even if it's just a split second your code is just doing nothing right now.
Is this what happens when we make a request when we are fetching data from an API when we're trying
to save data to an API.
Anytime we do some sort of single page app functionality which usually involves communicating with an
API communicating with a database or a server that takes time is our app just going to sit there doing
nothing.
And as a user just kind of sit there waiting for something to happen.
The answer is No.
How does that work.
And why not.
That's what we're going to answer in the next video.
JavaScript has a couple tricks up its sleeve or rather the browser has some tricks up its sleeve to
get around this single threaded ness of javascript.
So to summarize what we saw here in JavaScript at any given point JavaScript itself is running at most
one line of code so it's not multitasking.
It's not doing three things at once it's doing one thing at a time or nothing if it's not doing anything.
It's very important to understand that so that you can better understand the work around we have which
we're talking about right after this.